## Defense of Home and Property

### Why have Castle Laws Spread recently?

- No empirical research
- Mostly speculation
	- America has heightened consciousness
	- Lack of police officers (compensate)

## Choice of Evils Defense

Commit a lesser crime to avoid a worse crime.
- Escape jail when it's on fire, for instance.
- Cannot kill someone to save yourself
- Model Penal Code has three steps:
	- Identify the evils
	- Rank the evils
	- It's happening right now (Greater Evil is "imminent")
	- "Right Choices"
		- Destroy property to prevent fire
		- Break speeding laws to get someone to the hospital
		- Throw cargo overboard to save a ship and its crew
		- Dispensing drugs without a prescription in an emergency
		- Breaking into and entering a mountain cabin to avoid freezing to death
	- Life, safety, and health >> property
	- Government must rank the evils
	- Instruction must:
		- Be done to prevent a greater harm
		- Must be the only option
		- Must be proportional to the harm avoided
		- Subjective test
		- Objective test
		- Can't contribute to the scenario

## Consent

- Defense of consent
- Voluntary consent
- Knowing consent
- Authorized consent

Limits of consent:
- Minors
- Mental handicaps
- Intoxication

Situations where consent is Necessary:
- Sports (risk of injury)
- Surgery
- Sex
- Etc.

# Next Chapter - Excuses to Criminal Liability

Admits that they know what they did was wrong, but they have an excuse.

Usually insanity, age, or coercion

Affirmative Defense - Defendant has to prove it.

## Insanity

History of the Insanity Defense:
- Plato
	- Family is responsible
- Kings would pardon insane defendants
	- Would be kept in the care of a caregiver
- In English law
	- Defendant must be *completely* divorced of their sanity
	- Like an animal almost
- *Regina v. McNaughtan (1843)*
	- Sir Robert Peele - father of modern Criminal Justice
	- McNaughtan is considered a terrorist at this point (Scottish/English conflicts)
		- McNaughtan shoots Edward Drummend thinking that they were Sir Robert Peele
		- Pleads insanity
			- "Dream Team"
			- Lots of medical professional
			- Eyewitnesses
			- etc.
		- Defendant says "partial insanity should qualify"
			- "Insanity" is a term of law. "Mental Illness" is a term of medicine.
		- Crown did not dismiss the evidence.

### Myths and Reality

- You might spend *more* time in a mental institution than in prison if you plead insanity.
- It is also far less common than you'd think.

### Proving Insanity

- Critical Times
	- When the crime was committed (sanity)
	- When the defendant is charged and tried (competence)
- Presumption of sanity (1984 Finkel Case)
- Burden is on the defendant to prove by "clear and convincing"
	- State must then bring counter-evidence
- "Guilty but Mentally Ill"

### Tests of Insanity

- The Right-Wrong Test (McNaughtan Rule)
	- Oldest rule
	- At the time of the act, the defendant suffered a "defect of reason caused by a disease of the mind".
		- Only certain mental illnesses are valid for this excuse.
	- Prove that the defendant did not know the difference between right and wrong
		- Nature and quality of the act
		- That the act was wrong
