# Chapter 6 Continued

## Diminished Capacity Defense

### Failure of Proof

- Incapable of the requisite intent of the crime charged
- Not the same as diminished responsibility
	- Diminished responsibility is an excuse defense
- Does not happen that often
	- Often takes the form of arguing from "Murder" -> "Manslaughter"
	- Gets out of the death penalty
- Most states reject both of these defenses

## Age Excuse

### Under Common Law

- <7 Years Old
	- Cannot have the mental capacity to commit crimes
- 7-14 Years Old
	- Presumed not to have the mental capacity, but it can be argued
- >14 Years Old
	- Presumed to have the mental capacity

### Other Jurisdictions

- All jurisdictions have a separate system
	- Different words
		- "Delinquency" instead of "crime"
	- Different processes
	- Some things juveniles can't do that adults can

### Waiver to Adult Criminal Court

- Judicial - most common by far
	- Judge "can't do anything for them in juvenile court"
- Prosecutorial
	- "Frequent Flyers"
	- Must put on evidence and prove to the judge
- Legislative
	- Drunk driving is charged as an adult immediately

#### Criteria

- Serious, Violent offenses
	- Crimes against people
- Weaker cases get kept in juvenile court
- Maturity of defendant
- Prior record
- Threat to public safety

### State v. KRL 1992 840 P.2d 210 (Wash. App. 1992)

#### Facts

K.R.L. an eight-year-old boy was playing with a friend behind a building. Alder, a woman who lived near the building, told the boys to leave as the area was “dangerous”. K.R.L. refused, which Alder responded to by telling them to “get out of there now”. The boys ran off. Later, K.R.L. broke into Alder’s home and cut up her live goldfish and smeared it on the counter. He also clamped a plugged-in curling iron onto a towel. K.R.L. had several prior incidents of misbehavior.

#### Issue(s)

Did K.R.L. have the capacity to commit burglary?

#### Decision

Reversed.

#### Holding

The court ruled that, per Washington statutes, the State had failed to prove on a clear and convincing evidence that K.R.L. understood the act of burglary and that it was wrong. The court thought that the two prior incidents shown were not uncommon for such young children. The court also thought that K.R.L. only understood that his prior acts were wrong because he was “beaten black and blue” by his mother and did not understand their wrongness in the moment.

#### Case Significance

This case shows that it is very hard to convict a child of a serious crime on account of the burden of proof needed. Not only is it needed to prove that the child knew what they were doing was wrong, but it is also necessary to prove that they understood the offense itself. The younger the defendant, the more difficult this gets.

#### Dissent

No dissent was made.

## Duress Defense

- Can't be used for murder

### Problem

Hard to blame someone who is forced to commit a crime, but should we excuse people who harm innocent people to save themselves?

### Elements of Duress

1. Nature of the Threat
2. Immediacy of the Threat
3. Crimes the Defense Applies to
4. Level of Belief Regarding the Threat

## Intoxication Defense

### Voluntary Intoxication

Conflicting Principles
- Accountability
	- Still want you to be accountable for your actions
- Culpability
	- Don't like to punish people if they aren't culpable

Arizona specifically and most states disallow this defense.

#### Common Law

Drunkenness is considered an *aggravator*. Extra time goes onto the sentence.

### Involuntary Intoxication

- Valid in any state
- Unknowing or forced
- No free choice

## Entrapment Defense

- Government agents get people to commit crimes they wouldn't otherwise commit
	- All societies have done this
	- Rejected by U.S. courts for a long time
	- Shifting attitudes
	- Consensual crimes
	- Affirmative defense
- Subjective Entrapment
	- Where did the intent originate?
- Objective Entrapment
	- If a law-abiding citizen would commit the crime in this case, it is entrapment

*Oliver v. State*

Las Vegas has a bad transient problem. Undercover agents were pretending to be passed out and homeless etc. Oliver steals $10 from one of these officers while they are pretending to be passed out. The $10 was placed in a way to be enticing to him. This was ruled as entrapment.

## Syndrome Defenses

Syndrome - group of symptoms or signs typical of a disease, disturbance, or condition

- PMS 
	- This has been tried, but no successful attempt
	- Little research or documentation
	- Hard to connect it to the crime
- PTSD
	- Depression, brain damage, etc.