# Chapter 7 Notes

## Parties to Crime

### Difference Between Complicity and Vicarious Liability

Difference in relationship and actions between the two:

- Vicarious Liability usually involves a relationship (business mainly) between two parties.

### Complicity

When are you liable for someone else's conduct?

- Accomplices
- Accessories

### Vicarious Liability

#### Theories

- Agency Theory
- Forfeited Personality Identity Theory

#### Common Law Parties to Crime

Three Blocks of Time:

##### Before

- Accessory Before the Fact
- Not at the scene but help the perpetrator get things prepared
- Not present when the crime is committed

##### During

- Principle in the First Degree
	- Who pulled the trigger?
- Principle in the Second Degree
	- Who helped them commit the crime

##### After

- Accessory After the Fact
- Helped the perpetrator after the crime
- Not present when the crime is committed

Under Common Law, the Principle must be charged and convicted before the accessories may be charged.

#### Today

Today we have Accomplices and Accessories.

##### Accomplice

- Participated before or during the crime
- Charged with the same crime and sentenced to the same punishment as the principle
- *Not* conspirators
	- Conspiracy is an agreement to commit some other crime (separate crime)
	- *Pinkerton* Rule
		- Can be charged on both Conspiracy and as an Accomplice

##### Accessory

- Participated after the fact
- Usually charged with a misdemeanor

## Accomplice Actus Reus

- "Some positive act in aid of the commission of the offense"
- How much aid is enough?
- Words can qualify
- *Mere presence rule*
- Major exception to the mere presence rule
	- Legal duty (mother/child, for example)
- Actions taken after crimes are committed

### Accomplice Mens Rea

- Purposely vs. Knowingly
	- Early decisions used the "Knowingly" standard
- *U.S. v. Peoni (1938)*
	- Peoni gave counterfeit money to someone knowingly
	- Supreme Court said the money must've been given to Dorsi with the "express purpose" of sharing in the proceeds.
- Standard has changed several times between purposeful and knowing
- Some states even use the "Reckless" standard (not many)

### Participation After the Crime

### Common Law

- Treated as if they committed the crime
- Principle had to be charged and convicted

### Modern Statutes

- Misdemeanor
- "Aiding and Abetting"
- "Obstruction of Justice"

### Elements of Accessory After-the-Fact

1. Personally aided in the crime
2. Knew the felony was committed
3. Did it to help the principle avoid prosecution
4. Is a different person from the principle