## Self-Defense Continued

### Retreat

- "Retreat to the wall"
	- Common Law
	- Some states got rid of this after the Revolution
		- "Real men" don't retreat
	- Death or serious bodily injury must be threatened before force is allowed
- Stand-your-ground Rule
- Castle Exception
	- Don't have to retreat
	- Fend off unprovoked attack
		- Must still be a threat of death or serious bodily injury
- Domestic violence
	- Cohabitant exception
		- Neither have the duty to retreat
	- "Battered-woman" syndrome
		- Affects "imminence" requirement
		- Changes the perception of the defendant (victim of domestic abuse)
			- Changes to a subjective test 
			- Recognizes subtle hints that danger may be coming
				- Changes in voice, attitude, etc.
		- The "cycle of violence":
			- Initial Tension -> Increasing Violence -> Explosion -> "Honeymoon" Phase -> Initial Tension again
			- Must sever the cycle after an explosion (immediate threat of jail time)
			- Indiana made an exception for domestic violence to arrest perpetrators of the "misdemeanor"

## Defense of Others

In the past, Defense of Others was limited to those you have a "special relationship" with.

Trending in the opposite direction
- Must have been in the right in the first place

### Lethal Force

- Protecting Life - Lethal Force
- Protecting Others' Life - Limited Lethal Force
- Home - Limited Lethal Force
- Stuff - No Lethal Force

"A Man's Home is His Castle"
- Old common law
	- Someone breaks in at night
	- Someone is stealing something
- Now
	- Must be threatened to use lethal force
	- Where does the Castle Law extend to?
		- House - Yes
		- Fenced-in yard (curtilage) - No
	- Do you have to have entry into the home? Yes.
	- Does the home have to be occupied? Yes. (no traps)
	- A reasonable amount of *non-deadly* force can be used to protect belongings.
		- If there is time to call the police, you must do that.
- New Castle Laws
	- Since 2005, some states have expanded the right to use deadly force
	- No duty to retreat
	- Presumption of "reasonableness"
		- State has to *disprove* reasonableness
			- Extremely difficult
	- "Home" is anywhere you have the legal right to be.
	- Some states allow deadly force to protect property.
	- Are these laws a "License to Kill"?