# Defenses to Criminal Liability

## Review

### Criminal Conduct

Criminal Intent -> Criminal Act
- Is it justified?
- Is it Excused?

## Two Kinds of Defenses

- Justification Defense (self-defense)
- Excuse Defense (insanity defense)

## Proving Defenses

### Affirmative Defenses

Defendants provide some evidence (only time this has to happen)
- Perfect defense
	- Client gets off completely
- Imperfect defense
	- Defendant is found guilty of a lesser defense
- Mitigating Circumstances
	- Mitigate the sentencing (less time in prison)

### Jury Nullification

Indiana allows the jury to interpret the law as well as the facts.
- Jury knows the defendant did the crime, but say "not guilty" anyway

## Self-Defense

Lethal use of force is normally a government-only action.

Requires three circumstances:
1. The necessity is great.
2. It exists "right now".
3. It's for prevention only.

Elements of self-defense:
1. Non-aggressor
	- Must not instigate the conflict
2. Necessity
	- Cannot be a threat of action later, must be an immediate threat
3. Proportionality
4. Reasonable Belief

### Goetz Case

Four youths enter the subway. Goetz is there, minding his own business. Goetz has an illegal firearm. Victim 1 approaches Goetz and tells him to "give me $5". Goetz stands up and shoots 5 times, killing all 4 youths. Goetz got away. Goetz admits to the crime. He explains his fear of mugging, as he was mugged before. He got a gun following the mugging and had successfully stopped many muggings.  He explains his process for why he shot the individuals. This case resulted in a huge drop in crime in the subways following.  Grand Jury only wanted the illegal firearm charge (probably because the Grand Jury thought the subway was safer after the act). There was a second Grand Jury that wanted Goetz on more charges. Goetz challenges.

"He reasonably believes" is the language used in the New York statute. Prosecutor wanted an objective test (emphasis on 'reasonably'); Goetz wants a subjective test (emphasis on 'He').

1. Determine whether the defendant *subjectively* believes he is threatened.
2. Determine whether he is *objectively* threatened (i.e. a reasonable person would think so.)


